---
title: 密码学-消息验证码
tags: 
- 密码学
categories: [信息安全, 密码学]
sharing: True
---

# Basic concepts

## Message integrity

**Message integrity (Message authentication)**: each party should be able to identify when a message it receives was sent by the party claiming to send it, and it was not modified in transit.

E.g. A bank should make sure a transfer request is sent by a legitimate user, and the received request should not be modified.

*Remember that encryption does not privide any integrity unless it is specifically designed with that purpose!*
<!-- more -->

E.g. For a stream cipher, the attacker can filp one or more bits of the ciphertext $c$ to modify the decrypted plaintext. Since the attacker do not know the plaintext, it does not contradict the concept of secrecy.

## Message Authentication Codes (MAC)

### Definition

A message authentication code (MAC) consists of three probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms $(Gen,Mac,Vrfy)$ such that

1. The key-generation algorithm $Gen$ takes as input the security parameter $1^n$ and outputs a key $k$ with $|k|\ge n$.
2. The tag-generation algorithm $Mac$ takes as input a key $k$ and a message $m\in \{0,1\}^*$, and outputs a tag $t$. We write it as $t\leftarrow Mac_{k}(m)$ since the algorithm might be randomized.
3. The deterministic verification algorithm $Vrfy$ takes as input a key $k$, a message $m$ and a tag $t$. It outputs a bit $b$, with $b=1$ meaning valid and $b=0$ meaning invalid. We write this as $b:=Vrfy_{k}(m,t)$.

It is required that for every $n$, every key $k$ output by $Gen(1^{n})$ and every $m\in \{0,1\}^*$, it holds that $Vrfy_{k}(m,Mac_{k}(m))=1$.

### Security of MACs

The message authentication experiment $Mac-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi}(n)$:

1. A key $k$ is generated by running $Gen(1^{n})$.
2. The adversary $\mathcal{A}$ is given input $1^n$ and oracle access to $Mac_{k}(\cdot)$. The adversary eventually outputs $(m,t)$ ($m$ could be any messages of its choice). Let $\mathcal{Q}$ denote the set of all queries that $\mathcal{A}$ asked its oracle.
3. $\mathcal{A}$ succeeds if and only if (1) $Vrfy_{k}(m,t)=1$ and (2) $m \notin \mathcal{Q}$. In that case the output of the experiment is defined to be 1.

A message authentication code $\Pi =(Gen, Mac, Vrfy)$ is existentilly unforgeable under an adaptive chosen-message attack, or just **secure**, if for all probabilistic polynomial-time adversaries $\mathcal{A}$, there is a negligible function $negl$ such that
$$
Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A},\pi}(n)=1]\le negl(n)
$$

This definition of security is strong in two respects. First, the adversary is allowed to request $MAC$ tags for any messages of its choice. Second, the adversary is considered to have broken the scheme if it can output a valid tag on any previously unauthenticated message. 

By making the definition of security for MACs as strong as possible, we ensure that secure MACs can be used for a wide range of purposes without worring about compatibility of the MAC with the semantics of the application.

Remember the MAC itself offers *no protection against replay attacks!* To prevent replay attacks, two common techniques are used:

- *Sequence numbers (or counters)*: the communicating users maintain(synchronize) a state. It can be problematic when users communicate over a lossy channel.
- *Time stamps*: the sender prepends the current time $T$ to the message before authenticating, and sends $T$ along with the mesage and the and the resulting tag $t$. The receiver verifies that $t$ is a valid tag for $T||m$ and $T$ is within acceptable clock skew from current time. This method requires maintaining closely synchronized clocks. And a replay attack can still take place if it is done quickly enough.

### Strong MACs

Consider a modified experiment $Mac-sforge$ that defined the same way as $Mac-forge$, except that the set $\mathcal{Q}$ contains pairs of oracle queries and their associated responses (i.e. $(m,t)\in \mathcal{Q}$). The adversary $\mathcal{A}$ succeeds if and only if $\mathcal{A}$ outputs $(m,t)$ such that $Vrfy_{k}(m,t)=1$ and $(m,t)\notin \mathcal{Q}$.

A message authentication code $\Pi=(Gen,Mac,Vrfy)$ is strongly secure, or a strong MAC, if for all probabilistic polynomial-time adversaries $\mathcal{A}$, there is a negligible function $negl$ such that:
$$
Pr[Mac-sforge_{\cal{A},\pi}(n)=1]\le negl(n)
$$

Let $\Pi=(Gen,Mac,Vrfy)$ be a secure MAC that uses canonical verification (the receiver re-compute the tag and check for equality). Then $\Pi$ is a strong MAC. (Attention that the definition of the MAC do not have any restriciton to how $Vrfy$ algorithm works.)

**A potential timing attack** (an example of side channel attack): Consider an adversary who can send message/tag pairs to the receiver. The adversary can learn not only whether the receiver accepts or not, but also the time to make decisions. If there is a MAC using canonical verification, the time to reject differs depending on the position of the first unequal byte. The attacker can send $(m,t_{0}),\cdots,(m,t_{255})$ to the receiver, where $t_{j}$ is a string with the first $i$ bytes set correctly and the $(i+1)st$ byte equal to $j$. The tag with slightly longer time for rejection has the correct $(i+1)st$ byte. 

*MAC verification should use time-independent string comparison that always compares all bytes!*



# Construct secure MACs

## A fixed-length MAC

### Construction

Let $F$ be a pseudorandom function. Define a fixed-length MAC for messages of length $n$ as follows:

- **Mac**: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$ and a message $m\in \{0,1\}^n$, output the tag $t:=F_{k}(m)$. (If $|m|\ne |k|$ then output nothing.)
- **Vrfy**: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$, a message $m\in \{0,1\}^n$ and a tag $t\in \{0,1\}^n$, output 1 if and only if $t=F_{k}(m)$. (If $|m|\ne |k|$ then output 0.)

If F is a pseudorandom function, then the above construction is a secure fixed-length MAC for messages of length n.

### Proof

Consider the MAC $\tilde{\Pi}$ using a truly random function $f$ instead of pseudorandom function $F_{k}$. For any message $m\notin \mathcal{Q}$, the value $t=f(m)$ is uniformly distributed in $\{0,1\}^n$ from the view of adversary $\mathcal{A}$, so we can get:
$$
	Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A},\tilde{\pi}}(n)=1]\le 2^{-n}
$$

Then construct a distinguisher $D$ that is given input $1^n$ and access to an oracle $\mathcal{O}:\{0,1\}^{n}\rightarrow \{0,1\}^{n}$. (1) Run $\mathcal{A}(1^{n})$. Whenever $\mathcal{A}$ queries its MAC oracle on a message $m$, $\mathcal{A}$ obtain a response $t$. (2) When $\mathcal{A}$ outputs $(m,t)$ at the end of its execution, query $\mathcal{O}$ with $m$ and obtain response $\hat{t}$. If $\hat{t}=t$ and $\mathcal{A}$ never queried its MAC oracle on $m$, then output 1; otherwise output 0.

If $D$'s oracle is a pseudorandom function, then the view of $\mathcal{A}$ when run as a sub-routine by $D$ is distributed identically to the view of $\mathcal{A}$ in experiment $Mac-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi}(n)$. Therefore, 
$$
	Pr[D^{F_{k}(\cdot)}(1^{n})=1]=Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A},\pi}(n)=1]
$$

If $D$'s oracle is a truly random function, then the view of $\mathcal{A}$ when run as a sub-routine by $D$ is distributed identically to the view of $\mathcal{A}$ in experiment $Mac-forge_{\mathcal{A},\tilde{\pi}}(n)$. Therefore, 
$$
	Pr[D^{f(\cdot)}(1^{n})=1]=Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A},\tilde{\pi}}(n)=1]
$$

Since $F$ is a pseudorandom function and $D$ runs in polynomial time, so there exists a negligible function $negl$ that
$$
	|Pr[D^{F_{k}(\cdot)}(1^{n})=1]-Pr[D^{f(\cdot)}(1^{n})=1]|\le negl(n)
$$

Combining the above four equations, we finally get
$$
Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A},\pi}(n)=1]\le 2^{-n}+negl(n)
$$
which proves the theorem.

## Domain extension for MACs

### Construction

Let $\Pi'=(Mac',Vrfy')$ be a fixed-length MAC for messages of length $n$. Define a MAC as follows:

- $Mac$: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$ and a message $m\in \{0,1\}^*$ of nonzero length $\ell < 2^{n/4}$, parse $m$ into $d$ blocks $m_{1},\cdots,m_{d}$, each of length $n/4$.(The final block is padded with 0s if necessary.) Choose a uniform identifier $r\in \{0,1\}^{n/4}$. For $i=1,\cdots,d$, compute $t_{i}\leftarrow Mac_{k}'(r||\ell||i||m_{i})$, where $i,\ell$ are encoded as strings of length $n/4$. Output the tag $t:=<r,t_{1},\cdots,t_{d}>$.
- $Vrfy$: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$, a message $m\in \{0,1\}^*$ of nonzero length $\ell < 2^{n/4}$, and a tag $t:=<r,t_{1},\cdots,t_{d'}>$, parse $m$ into $d$ blocks $m_{1},\dots,m_{d}$, each of length $n/4$.(The final block is padded with 0s if necessary.) Output 1 if and only if $d'=d$ and $Vrfy_{k}'(r||\ell||i||m_{i},t_{i})=1$ for $1\le i \le d$.

If $\Pi'$ is a secure fixed-length MAC for messages of length $n$, then the following construction is a secure MAC (for arbitrary-length messages).

**Note**: 

(1)  $i$ is used for preventing block reordering attack (the attacker shuffles the order of blocks in an authenticated message). 

(2) $\ell$ is intended to thwart truncation attack (the attacker drop blocks and corresponding tags from the end of the message). 

(3) $r$ aims at preventing "mix-and-match" attack (the attacker combines blocks from different messages).

### Proof

Let $Repeat$ denote the event that the same random identifier appears in two of the tags returned by the MAC oracle in experiment $MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)$. $NewBlock$ denote the event that $\mathcal{A}$ tries to output a valid tag on a block that was never previously authenticated by $Mac'$ in the course of answering $\mathcal{A}$'s $Mac'$ queries.

We have
$$
\begin{align}
	Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1]=& Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge Repeat] \notag \\
	+ & Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge \overline{Repeat}\wedge NewBlock] \notag \\
	+ & Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge \overline{Repeat}\wedge \overline{NewBlock}] \notag \\
	\le & Pr[Repeat]+ \notag \\
	& Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge NewBlock] + \notag \\
	& Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge \overline{Repeat}\wedge \overline{NewBlock}]
\end{align}
$$

(1) $Pr[Repeat]$ is negligible. Applying the "birthday bound" (search "birthday problem" for detail), we have $Pr[Repeat]\le \frac{q(n)^{2}}{2^{n/4}}$. Since $\mathcal{A}$ makes only polynomially many queries (i.e., $q(n)$ is polynomial), this value is negligible.

(2) $Pr[MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge \overline{Repeat}\wedge \overline{NewBlock}]=0$. If $MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)=1$ and $Repeat$ did not occur, then it must be the case that $NewBlock$ happens. So $\overline{Repeat}$ and $\overline{NewBlock}$ can not occur at the same time.

(3) $Pr[MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge NewBlock]$ is negligible. Construct a PPT adversary $\mathcal{A}'$ attacks the fixed-length MAC $\Pi$. $\mathcal{A'}$ runs as a subroutine of $\mathcal{A}$: answering the request by $\mathcal{A}$ for a tag on $m$ by choosing $r\leftarrow \{0,1\}^{n/4}$, parsing $m$ and making necessary queries to $Mac_{k}'(\cdot)$; check whether $NewBlock$ occur when \mathcal{A} outputs. If $MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)=1$ then the tag for every block is valid; if $NewBlock$ occurs then $\mathcal{A}'$ outputs a block that was never previously authenticated. So $\mathcal{A'}$ succeeds in outputting a valid forgery on a previously unauthenticated message with probability
$$
Pr[Mac-forge_{\cal{A'},\pi}(n)=1]\ge Pr[MAC-forge_{\cal{A},\pi'}(n)=1 \wedge NewBlock]
$$
The left-hand side is negligible, so proving the claim.

So from the above we have proved that $Pr[MAC-forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi'}(n)=1]$ is negligible.

## CBC-MAC

Let $F$ be a pseudorandom function, and fix a length function $\ell >0$. The basic CBC-MAC construction is as follows:

- $Mac$: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$ and a message $m$ of length $\ell(n)\cdot n$, parse $m$ as $m=m_{1},\cdots,m_{\ell}$ where each $m_{i}$ is of length $n$, and set $t_{0}:=0^n$ and $t_{i}:=F_{k}(T_{k-1}~XOR~m_{i})$. Output $t_{\ell}$ as the tag.
- $Vrfy$: on input a key $k\in \{0,1\}^n$, a message $m$, a tag $t$, if $m$ is not of length $\ell(n)\cdot n$ the output 0. Otherwise, output 1 if and only if $t=Mac_{k}(m)$.

Let $\ell$ be a polynomial. If $F$ is a pseudorandom function, then the above construction is a secure MAC for messages of length $\ell(n)\cdot n$. Note that $t_{0}:=0^n$ is crucial for security, and it is no longer secure when using a random $t_0$.

For arbitrary-length messages, the fixed-length CBC-MAC can be modified in two ways: 

- Prepend the message $m$ with its length $|m|$ (encoded as an n-bit string) and compute basic CBC-MAC on the result.
- Choose two independent, uniform keys $k_1 \in \{0,1\}^n$ and $k_2 \in \{0,1\}^n$. Then to authenticate a message $m$, first compute the result $t$ of basic CBC-MAC of $m$ using $k_1$, and the tag is computed as $\hat{t}=F_{k_2}(t)$. 



# Authenticated encryption

## Definitions

Let $\Pi=(Gen,Enc,Dec)$ be a private-key encryption scheme, $\mathcal{A}$ be an adversary, and $n$ be the security parameter. The unforgeable encryption experiment $Enc-Forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi}(n)$ is defined as follows:

1. Run $Gen(1^n)$ to obtain a key $k$.
2. The adversary $\mathcal{A}$ is given input $1^n$ and access to an encryption oracle $Enc_{k}(\cdot)$. The adversary outputs a ciphertext $c$.
3. Let $m=Dec_{k}(c)$, and let $\mathcal{Q}$ denote the set of all queries that $\mathcal{A}$ asked its encryption oracle. The output of the experiment is 1 if and only if (1) $m\ne \text{error}$ and (2) $m\notin \mathcal{Q}$.

A private-key encryption scheme $\Pi$ is unforgeable if for all probabilistic polynomial-time adversaries $\mathcal{A}$, there is a negligible function $negl$ such that:
$$
Pr[Enc-Forge_{\mathcal{A},\pi}(n)=1]\le negl(n)
$$
And a private-key encryption scheme $\Pi$ is authenticated encryption scheme if it is CCA-secure and unforgeable.

## Generic constructions

Let $\Pi_{E}=(Enc,Dec)$ be a CPA-secure encryption scheme and $\Pi_{M}=(Mac,Vrfy)$ denote a message authentication code, where key generation in both schemes simply involves choosing a uniform n-bit key. There are three natural approaches to combining encryption and message authentication using independent keys $k_E$ and $k_M$ for $\Pi_{E}$ and $\Pi_{M}$:

1. **Encrypt-and-authenticate**: Given a message $m$, the transmitted value is $<c,t>$ where
    $$c\leftarrow Enc_{k_E}(m)~\text{and}~t\leftarrow Mac_{k_M}(m)$$.

  This approach may not achieve even the most basic level of secrecy, since MAC itself does not auarantee any secrecy so it is possible that $t$ might leak information about $m$ to an eavesdropper. Also, it is not CPA-secure.

2. **Authenticate-then-encrypt**: A MAC tag $t\leftarrow MAC_{k_M}(m)$ is first computed, then $m||t$ is encrypted and the resulting value $Enc_{k_E}(m||t)$ is transmitted. This combination does not necessarily yield an authenticated encryption scheme, since the decryption has two steps.

3. **Encrypt-then-authenticate**: The message $m$ is first encrypted by $c\leftarrow Enc_{k_E}(m)$, then the a MAC is computed by $t\leftarrow Mac_{k_M}(c)$, and the ciphertext is $<c,t>$. Decryption of $<c,t>$ is done by outputting error if $Vrfy_{k_M}(c,t)\ne 1$, and otherwise outputting $Dec_{k_E}(c)$. 

If $\Pi_E$ is a CPA-secure private-key encryption scheme, and $\Pi_{M}$ is a strongly secure MAC, then the encrypt-then-authenticate approach is an authenticated encryption scheme. Note that the $k_E$ and $k_M$ must be independent to ensure CCA-secure, and this is a basic principle of cryptography: different instances of cryptographic primitives should always use independent keys.

## Secure communication sessions

The authenticated encryption scheme does not suffice the following potential attacks:

- *Re-ordering attack*: An attacker can swap the order of the messages.
- *Replay attack*: An attacker can replay a valid ciphertext $c$ sent previously by one of the parties.
- *Reflection attack*: An attacker can take a ciphertext $c$ sent from A to B and send it back to A.

To prevent the above attacks, a counter is used to prevent the first two and a directionality bit is used to prevent the third.



# References

1. Introduction to Modern Cryptography, Second Edition.
2. Understanding Cryptography: A Textbook for Students and Practitioners (Chinese Version).